Guide: Security-Focused Guide for AI Code Assistant Instructions (#936)
ossf/wg-best-practices-os-developers: docs/Security-Focused-Guide-for-AI-Code-Assistant-Instructions.md

# **Security-Focused Guide for AI Code Assistant Instructions**

> AI code assistants can significantly speed up development, but they need guidance to produce **secure** and robust code. This guide explains how to create custom instructions (e.g. a Copilot **instructions file**) that ensure the AI assistant accounts for application code security, supply chain safety, and platform or language-specific considerations and to embed a “security conscience” into the tool. In practice, this means fewer vulnerabilities making it into your codebase. Remember that these instructions should be kept concise, specific, and actionable – the goal is to influence the AI’s behavior without overwhelming it.

Author: ```suggestion
AI code assistants can significantly speed up development, but they need guidance to produce **secure** and robust code. This guide explains how to create custom instructions (e.g. [GitHub Copilot instructions file](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/how-tos/custom-instructions/adding-repository-custom-instructions-for-github-copilot), [Cline instructions file](https://docs.cline.bot/enterprise-solutions/custom-instructions), [Cursor rules](https://docs.cursor.com/context/rules), [Claude markdown](https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-code/common-workflows#create-an-effective-claude-md-file), etc.) that ensure the AI assistant accounts for application code security, supply chain safety, and platform or language-specific considerations and to embed a “security conscience” into the tool. In practice, this means fewer vulnerabilities making it into your codebase. Remember that these instructions should be kept concise, specific, and actionable – the goal is to influence the AI’s behaviour without overwhelming it.
```

* **Secure Defaults & Configurations:** Include guidance such as: *“Prefer safe defaults in configurations – for example, use HTTPS by default, require strong encryption algorithms, and disable insecure protocols or options.”* By specifying this, the AI will be more likely to generate code that opts-in to security features. Always instruct the AI to follow the principle of least privilege (e.g. minimal file system permissions, least-privileged user accounts for services, etc.) in any configuration or code it proposes.  
* **Testing for Security:** Encourage the AI to produce or suggest tests for critical code paths. In your instructions, add: *“When applicable, generate unit tests for security-critical functions (including negative tests to ensure the code fails safely).”* Automated testing is a recognized best practice – guides recommend including negative tests to verify that what *shouldn’t* happen, doesn’t happen.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
* **Call out and review stubbed code:** If the AI generates code that is stubbed or incomplete, instruct it to flag these areas for review. For example: *“If you generate placeholder code (e.g., `TODO` comments), ensure it is marked for security review before deployment.”* This will help ensure that any incomplete code does not inadvertently introduce vulnerabilities.

```
